In the past several videos you've learned about one way to multiply two vectors.
And it's called the dot product or the inner product.
There is another way to multiply two vectors and that is called the Outer product.
And that's what you're going to learn in this video.
The outer product is defined between two vectors and unlike the dot product or the inner product the
outer product can be computed between two vectors that actually have different lengths.
So in this particular example you see two vectors that are both four dimensional but I will show you
in the python segment that you can also compute the outer product between two vectors that have different
lengths.
OK.
So what is the outer product between this vector and this vector.
Well it looks like this the outer product between two vectors is an entire matrix.
So how to think about this matrix.
Well notice that all of the columns of this matrix are the same as the column here.
So this left vector and all the rows of this matrix here the outer product matrix are just repeats of
this vector here.
So the row vector on the right.
And that's essentially the way that you build up the outer product matrix.
You take the column vector on the left and you just repeat those columns for however many elements there
are rows in the right vector here and all the rows in the outer product are just repeats of this row
vector on the right for however many elements are in this column vector on the left.
So I think it's probably easier just to look at it and understand it than it is to explain it in words.
So let's switch to Python and see how to implement the outer product.
We are going to use the NUM pi module and the map plot lib module in order to do a little bit of visualization.
So let me start by creating two vectors.
Let's say none pi these are just going to be random vectors.
Let's make this one 50 elements long and I'll set the two to B.
How about 80 elements long.
Okay.
And now just to show you that the dot product is not defined between these two vectors of course you
already know that.
So this has the dimensions are not equal.
So it's not valid to compute the dot product between these.
However the outer product is a valid operation.
And let's see what that result is.
OK.
So that result actually doesn't even print out the entire matrix.
You can see there's a bunch of ellipses here a bunch of dots so that's Python's way of telling us that
basically this matrix is too large.
It's not going to print out the entire thing.
So instead we can actually make an image of this.
So let's say I'll call this O P for outer product and then let's see what this looks like.
So P L T that I am show O P and then appeal to that show.
So you can see that this matrix has 50 rows and 80 columns.
So it's a pretty big matrix that corresponds to the size of these two individual vectors.
And you notice also that it looks like it has this kind of know simple repeating pattern to it.
And that's not surprising because every column is just a weighted version of the first column.
So all of the columns here are essentially just the same thing as the first column weighted by different
numbers.
And those numbers come from the different rows here.
So there you go the outer product in python in the exercise.
We are going to examine whether the outer product is matrix commutative and whether it's scalar multiplication
commutative.
So first of all let me give you a quick reminder of what the commutative property means.
Although we discuss this in an earlier section of the course.
So for normal scalar.
So for single numbers the commutative property means that a times B equals B times A.
So this is for normal numbers.
You know you think if a is two and B is three then two times three equals three times two.
So that's the commutative property.
So what we are going to ask here what you are going to test in this exercise is whether the outer product
is also commutative.
In particular you want to ask whether the outer product between V and W is the same thing as the outer
product between W and V.
So that's the first part of this exercise.
The second part of this exercise is to test whether the outer product is also scalar multiplication
commutative.
So here imagine that V is a vector W is a vector so we can compute the outer product between V and W.
This is kind of the standard notation for indicating the outer product so whether the outer product
between V and W is affected by the position of this scalar c.
So here C is just a single number.
Maybe it's the number pi.
Or maybe it's three divided by pi.
So c times the outer product between V and W versus v times C times w versus V Times w times C..
Okay so here's your two parts to this exercise.
So now you should pause a video switch to Python.
Write some code to investigate the commutative property and now I'm going to walk you through my solution
to this or my approach to figuring this out.
All right.
So what I'm gonna do is create two vectors let's say V is and P that a range so I'm just gonna come
up with numbers that go from 1 to 10.
So just to show you what this vector looks like or troops I mean 10.
So you have to make the second input here to be 11 because that's an exclusive upper boundary okay.
And then I'm gonna have w and it's important to make sure that these are different sizes.
Let's say a W goes from one to five and you want these to be different sizes so we can really see whether
VW or the outer product between VW is the same as the outer product between W and V.
So this is pretty straightforward.
Print num pi dot outer v comma W and then directly underneath.
I'm going to print the outer product between W and V.
Now let's see if these two results are the same.
Huh.
They are definitely not the same.
This matrix is tall and this matrix is wide so the sizes aren't even the same between this result and
this result.
However although these two results are not exactly the same it does kind of seem like this matrix you
know if you would like flip this matrix around it would be this matrix.
You know so here the first row in this matrix is the first column in this matrix and so on.
So that is pretty interesting.
So it does seem like although the outer product is not strictly matrix commutative it does seem like
there is some relationship between the outer product between VFW and the outer product between W and
V.
And in fact the relationship between those happens to be related to an operation called the transpose
which I've already mentioned a few times before and I'm going to talk a lot more about the transpose
operation and I think maybe two or three videos for now.
Okay.
But so the direct answer to the question in the exercise is no.
The outer product is not commutative because the outer product between V and W is different from the
outer product between W and V.
So then the next part of the exercise was about scalar multiplication.
So I'm going to come up with some scalar.
Let's just say 4 and then what I'm gonna do is multiply these scalar by different positions in the outer
product.
So let's start with.
I call this reds 1 4 result 1.
So that's going to be x times the outer product between V and W and then I'll call this reds too.
This is going to be num pi dot outer s times V common W.
So the outer product between s times V and W and then we have reds 3 that's going to be none pi dot
outer outer v comma s times W and then finally I'm gonna have reds for equals none pi dot outer outer
foot V and W and then multiply at the very end by s.
All right.
And so now what I'm thinking is that if these results are equal to each other I should be able to subtract
them and get the zeros matrix.
So let's start with reds 1 minus reds 2 0 right.
So these are all zero.
So that tells us that these two operations are identical or the outcomes of these two operations are
identical because subtracting the two gives us all zeroes so we can try this again with reds 3 and again
with reds 4 and you can probably see where this is going.
So there's two and then four and then just to make sure this is totally exhaustive I'll do three and
four.
So basically every way that we subtracted one result from another result we always got the zeros matrix
so that was pretty interesting.
We used Python as a tool to help us understand some properties of linear algebra and in particular the
outer product.
So we discovered that the outer product itself is not commutative it's not matrix commutative.
However the outer product is scalar multiplication commutative.
So in this video you learned about the outer product and how to compute it or what it means how to interpret
it and you saw a way to use Python as a tool to test one specific property of mathematics and linear
algebra.
And that is matrix connectivity and scalar multiplication community.